
# [pygame.joystick][1]

Pygame module for interacting with joysticks, gamepads, and trackballs.

Each instance of the Joystick class represents one gaming device plugged into the computer.  
If a gaming pad has multiple joysticks on it, then the joystick object can actually represent multiple joysticks on that single game device.

For a quick way to initialise the joystick module and get a list of Joystick instances use the following code:

```python
pygame.joystick.init()
joysticks = [pygame.joystick.Joystick(x) for x in range(pygame.joystick.get_count())]
```

The following event types will be generated by the joysticks

- JOYAXISMOTION
- JOYBALLMOTION
- JOYBUTTONDOWN
- JOYBUTTONUP
- JOYHATMOTION

And in pygame 2, which supports hotplugging:

- JOYDEVICEADDED
- JOYDEVICEREMOVED

Note that in pygame 2, joysticks events use a unique ***"instance ID"***.  
The device index passed in the constructor to a Joystick object is not unique after devices have been added and removed.  
You must call `Joystick.get_instance_id()` to find the instance ID that was assigned to a Joystick on opening.

The event queue needs to be pumped frequently for some of the methods to work.  
So call one of `pygame.event.get`, `pygame.event.wait`, or `pygame.event.pump` regularly.

To be able to get joystick events and update the joystick objects while the window is not in focus, you may set the ***SDL_JOYSTICK_ALLOW_BACKGROUND_EVENTS*** environment variable. See [environment variables][2] for more details.

## .init()

Initialize the joystick module.
This function is called automatically by [pygame.init()](/doc/pygame.md/#init).

## .quit()

Uninitialize the joystick module.
After you call this any existing joystick objects will no longer work.

## .get_init()

```python
get_init() -> bool
```

Test if the [pygame.joystick.init()](#init) function has been called.

## .get_count()

Return the number of joystick devices on the system.

```python
get_count() -> count
```

The count will be `0` if there are no joysticks on the system.  
When you create Joystick objects using `Joystick(id)`, you pass an integer that must be lower than this count.

# .Joystick

Create a new ***Joystick*** object.

```python
Joystick(id) -> Joystick
```

Create a new joystick to access a physical device.  
The `id` argument must be a value from `0` to `pygame.joystick.get_count() - 1`.

Joysticks are initialised on creation and are shut down when deallocated.  
Once the device is initialized the pygame event queue will start receiving events about its input.  
Joystick objects are now opened immediately on creation.  
This class is also available through the `pygame.Joystick` alias.

## .quit() of Joysitck

Close a Joystick object.  
After this the pygame event queue will no longer receive events from the device.
It is safe to call this more than once.

## .get_init() of Joystick

Check if the Joystick is initialized.

```python
get_init() -> bool
```

## .get_instance_id()

Get the joystick instance ID.

```python
get_instance_id() -> int
```

This matches the `instance_id` field that is given in joystick events.

## .get_guid()

Get the joystick GUID.

```python
get_guid() -> str
```

This identifies the exact hardware of the joystick device.

## .get_power_level()

Get the approximate power status of the device.

```python
get_power_level() -> str
```

One of: `empty`, `low`, `medium`, `full`, `wired`, `max`, or `unknown`.

## .get_name()

Get the Joystick system name.

```python
get_name() -> string
```

It is unknown what name the system will give to the Joystick, but it should be a unique name that identifies the device.  
This method can safely be called while the Joystick is not initialized.

## .get_numaxes()

Get the number of axes on a Joystick.

```python
get_numaxes() -> int
```

There will usually be two for the position.  
Controls like rudders and throttles are treated as additional axes.

The `pygame.JOYAXISMOTION` events will be in the range from `-1.0 to 1.0`.  
A value of `0.0` means the axis is `centered`.  
Gamepad devices will usually be -1, 0, or 1 with no values in between.  
Older analog joystick axes will not always use the full -1 to 1 range, and the centered value will be some area around 0.

Analog joysticks usually have a bit of noise in their axis, which will generate a lot of rapid small motion events.

## .get_axis()

Get the current position of an axis.

```python
get_axis(axis_number: int) -> float
```

The value will range from `-1 to 1` with a value of `0` being `centered`.  
You may want to take into account some tolerance to handle jitter, and joystick drift may keep the joystick from centering at 0 or using the full range of position values.

The `axis_number` must be an integer from `0 to get_numaxes() - 1`.

When using gamepads both the control sticks and the analog triggers are usually reported as axes.

## .get_numballs()

Get the number of trackballs on a Joystick.

```python
get_numballs() -> int
```

These devices work similar to a mouse but they have no absolute position; they only have relative amounts of movement.

The `pygame.JOYBALLMOTION` event will be sent when the trackball is rolled.  
It will report the amount of movement on the trackball.

## .get_ball()

Get the ***relative*** position of a trackball.

```python
get_ball(ball_number: int) -> x, y
```

The value is a x, y pair holding the relative movement since the last call to `get_ball`.

The `ball number` must be an integer from `0 to get_numballs() - 1`.

## .get_numbuttons()

Get the number of buttons on a Joystick.

```python
get_numbuttons() -> int
```

These buttons have a boolean (on or off) state.

Buttons generate a `pygame.JOYBUTTONDOWN` and `pygame.JOYBUTTONUP` event when they are pressed and released.

## .get_button()

Get the current button state.

```python
get_button(button) -> bool
```

Returns the current state of a joystick button.

## .get_numhats()

Get the number of hat controls on a Joystick

```python
get_numhats() -> int
```

Hat devices are like miniature digital joysticks on a joystick. Each hat has two axes of input.

The `pygame.JOYHATMOTION` event is generated when the hat changes position.  
The position attribute for the event contains a pair of values that are either `-1, 0, or 1`.  
A position of `(0, 0)` means the hat is `centered`.

## .get_hat()

Get the position of a joystick hat.

```python
get_hat(hat_number) -> x, y
```

The position is given as two values representing the x and y position for the hat.  
`(0, 0)` means `centered`.  
A value of `-1` means `left/down` and a value of `1` means `right/up`:  
so (-1, 0) means left; (1, 0) means right; (0, 1) means up; (1, 1) means upper-right; etc.

This value is `digital`, i.e., each coordinate can be `-1, 0` or `1` but *never in-between*.

The hat number must be between `0 and get_numhats() - 1`.

## .rumble()

```python
rumble(low_frequency, high_frequency, duration) -> bool
```

Start a rumble effect on the joystick, with the specified strength ranging from `0 to 1`.  
`duration` is length of the effect, in `ms`.  
Setting the *duration* to `0` will play the effect until another one overwrites it or [Joystick.stop_rumble()](#stop_rumble) is called.  
If an effect is already playing, then it will be overwritten.

Returns `True` if the rumble was played successfully or `False` if the joystick does not support it or [pygame.version.SDL](/doc/pygame.md/#version) < ***(2, 0, 9)***.

## .stop_rumble()

Stop any rumble effect playing.

[Example code](https://github.com/pygame-community/pygame-ce/blob/main/examples/joystick.py)

## XBox 360 Controller

The Xbox 360 controller mapping has `6 axes`, `14 buttons`.  
The controller is recognized as ***"Xbox 360 Controller"***.

|||Directions: [-1.0, +1.0]|Axis|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Stick|Left|Down, Up|0|
|||Left, Right|1|
||Right|Down, Up|2|
|||Left, Right|3|
|Trigger|Left|Out, In|4|
||Right|Out, In|5|

||On, Off|Number|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Button|A|0|
||B|1|
||X|2|
||Y|3|
|Bumper|Left|4|
||Right|5|
|Button|Back|6|
||Start|7|
|Stick|Left In|8|
||Right In|9|
|D-pad|Up|10|
||Right|11|
||Down|12|
||Right|13|

## Playstation 4 Controller (Not tested!)

The PlayStation 4 controller mapping has `6 axes` and `16 buttons`.  
The controller is recognized as ***"PS4 Controller"***.

|||Directions: [-1.0, +1.0]|Axis|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Stick|Left|Down, Up|0|
|||Left, Right|1|
||Right|Down, Up|2|
|||Left, Right|3|
|Trigger|Left|Out, In|4|
||Right|Out, In|5|

||On, Off|Number|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Button|Cross|0|
||Circle|1|
||Square|2|
||Triangle|3|
||Share|4|
||PS|5|
||Options|6|
|Stick|Left In|7|
||Right In|8|
|Bumper|Left|9|
||Right|10|
|D-pad|Up|11|
||Down|12|
||Left|13|
||Right|14|
|Touch Pad|Click|15|

[1]:https://pyga.me/docs/ref/joystick.html
[2]:https://pyga.me/docs/ref/pygame.html#environment-variables

< End >
